DBZ-9053 Create documentation for embeddings SMT (#6431)
debezium/debezium: documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/ai/embeddings.adoc

One way how to do that is so-called text embeddings.
It's a process of conversion of a text to a high-dimensional numerical vector.
Representing text as a vector allows to do semantic similarity search and other advanced operations.

{prodname} offers build-in feature which transforms specified field into embedding and add this text embedding into the record.
Embedding inference is done by the selected model served by configured provider.
{prodname} offers several embeddings model providers.

Technically it's implemented as a  link:{link-kafka-docs}/#connect_transforms[single message transformation] (SMT) and under the hood it uses link:https://docs.langchain4j.dev/[langchain4j] framework to interact with embeddings providers.

== Behavior

Embeddings transformation takes specified record field and passes it to the configured embedding model for inference, i.e. creating an embedding from the text contained in this field.
Resulting embedding is appended to the record.
The source field is still part of the record.

The source field has to be a string field.

> Embedding field is a vector of float numbers.

Reviewer: I'd recommend to highlight that these are flot 16 numbers and also refer to Debezium's logical `io.debezium.data.FloatVector` type.

Author: I think they are float-32

The size of the vector depends on the selected model.

Both source and embedding field specification supports nested structures, e.g. `after.product_description_embedding`.

== Configuration

To create embeddings transformation, add SMT configuration to your connector configuration:

[source]
----
transforms=ai,
transforms.ai.type=io.debezium.ai.embeddings.FieldToEmbedding
----

You have to specify at least field which content will be used as an input for the embedding and the destination field where the embedding will be placed:

[source]
----
ai.embeddings.field.source=after.product,
ai.embeddings.field.embedding=after.product_embedding,
----

Finally, you have to include selected model prvier jar file into the connector class path and configure the provider.
E.g. for Ollama provider you need to add `debezium-ai-embeddings-ollama-$VERSION.jar` into your connector class path and configure Ollama URL and model name:

[source]
----

> ai.embeddings.ollama.url=http://localhost:11434,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ai.embeddings.ollama.url=http://localhost:11434
```

ai.embeddings.ollama.model.name=all-minilm
----

Overall configuration for Ollama provider can look like this:

[source]
----
transforms=ai,
transforms.ai.type=io.debezium.ai.embeddings.FieldToEmbedding
ai.embeddings.field.source=after.product,

> ai.embeddings.field.embedding=after.product_embedding,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ai.embeddings.field.embedding=after.product_embedding
```

> ai.embeddings.ollama.url=http://localhost:11434,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ai.embeddings.ollama.url=http://localhost:11434
```

ai.embeddings.ollama.model.name=all-minilm
----

=== General configuration options

.Descriptions of embedding SMT configuration options
[cols="30%a,25%a,45%a",subs="+attributes",options="header"]
|===
|Option
|Default
|Description

> |[[embeddings-source-filed]]xref:embeddings-source-filed[`embeddings.field.source`]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|[[embeddings-source-field]]xref:embeddings-source-field[`embeddings.field.source`]
```

|
|Record field which should be used as an input for the embeddings.
Has to be a string field.
|[[embeddings-embedding-field]]xref:embeddings-embedding-field[`embeddings.field.embedding`]
|
|Name of the new record field which will container text embedding.
|===

== Model provider configuration

=== Hugging Face

Embeddings provided by models available via link:https://huggingface.co//[Hugging Face].

.Huggins Face embeddings configuration options
[cols="30%a,25%a,45%a",subs="+attributes",options="header"]
|===
|Option
|Default
|Description

|[[embeddings-huggingface-access-token]]xref:embeddings-huggingface-access-token[`embeddings.huggingface.access.token`]
|
|Hugging Face access token.
|[[embeddings-huggingface-model-name]]xref:embeddings-huggingface-model-name[`embeddings.huggingface.model.name`]
|
|Name of the embedding model.

> List of available models can be obtained e.g. via REST API, for Hugging Face inference provider via `https://huggingface.co/api/models?inference_provider=hf-inference`.

Reviewer: Convert link to link

|[[embeddings-huggingface-baseurl]]xref:embeddings-huggingface-baseurl[`embeddings.huggingface.baseUrl`]
|https://api-inference.huggingface.co/
|Base Hugging Face inference API URL.
|[[embeddings-huggingface-operation-timeout-ms]]xref:embeddings-huggingface-operation-timeout-ms[`embeddings.huggingface.operation.timeout.ms`]
|15,000 (15 seconds)
|Maximum amount of time in milliseconds to wait for the embeddings reply.
|===

[NOTE]
====
Hugging Face link:https://huggingface.co/blog/inference-providers[started to provide embedding inference] also via link:https://huggingface.co/docs/inference-providers/en/index[external providers].
However, external providers don't seem to be supported by langchain4j framework yet.
Until it's supported by langchain4j, the only available inference provider is Hugging Face provider.
====

=== Ollama

> Supports any models provided by link:https://ollama.com/[Ollama] server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supports any model provided by link:https://ollama.com/[Ollama] server.
```

Resulting embedding is appended to the record.
The source field is still part of the record.

The source field has to be a string field.
Embedding field is a vector of float 32-bits numbers.
The size of the vector depends on the selected model.
{prodname} provides link:https://github.com/debezium/debezium/blob/main/debezium-core/src/main/java/io/debezium/data/vector/FloatVector.java[FloatVector] data type, which is used for internal representation of the embedding.
The schema type of the embedding field in the record is `io.debezium.data.FloatVector`.

Both source and embedding field specification supports nested structures, e.g. `after.product_description_embedding`.

== Configuration

To create embeddings transformation, add SMT configuration to your connector configuration:

[source]
----
transforms=ai,
transforms.ai.type=io.debezium.ai.embeddings.FieldToEmbedding
----

You have to specify at least field which content will be used as an input for the embedding and the destination field where the embedding will be placed:

[source]
----

> ai.embeddings.field.source=after.product

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be prefixed with `transforms.`?

Author: thanks @mfvitale , good point

However, external providers don't seem to be supported by langchain4j framework yet.
Until it's supported by langchain4j, the only available inference provider is Hugging Face provider.
====

=== Ollama

Supports any model provided by link:https://ollama.com/[Ollama] server.

.Ollama embeddings configuration options
[cols="30%a,25%a,45%a",subs="+attributes",options="header"]
|===
|Option
|Default
|Description

|[[embeddings-ollama-url]]xref:embeddings-ollama-url[`embeddings.ollama.url`]
|
|URL of the Ollama server, including port number, e.g. `http://localhost:11434`.
|[[embeddings-ollama-model-name]]xref:embeddings-ollama-model-name[`embeddings.ollama.model.name`]
|
|Name of the embedding model.
|[[embeddings-ollama-operation-timeout-ms]]xref:embeddings-ollama-operation-timeout-ms[`embeddings.ollama.operation.timeout.ms`]
|15,000 (15 seconds)
|Maximum amount of time in milliseconds to wait for the embeddings reply.
|===

=== ONNX MiniLM

Provides link:https://docs.langchain4j.dev/integrations/embedding-models/in-process[ONNX in-process] `all-minilm-l6-v2` model, which is included directly in the jar file.
No other configuration besides the general one is needed.

> As no other infrastructure or remote requests are needed in this case, this model is suitable especially for prototyping and testing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This model is especially suited to prototyping and testing, because it does not depend on any external infrastructure or remote requests. 
```

=== Voyage AI

Embeddings provided by link:https://www.voyageai.com/[Voyage AI] models.

.Voyage AI embeddings configuration options
[cols="30%a,25%a,45%a",subs="+attributes",options="header"]
|===
|Option
|Default
|Description

|[[embeddings-voyageai-access-token]]xref:embeddings-voyageai-access-token[`embeddings.voyageai.access.token`]
|

> |Voyage AI access token.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|The Voyage AI access token.
```

|[[embeddings-voyageai-model-name]]xref:embeddings-voyageai-model-name[`embeddings.voyageai.model.name`]
|
|Name of the embedding model.

> List of the Voyage AI models can be found in Voyage AI link:https://docs.voyageai.com/docs/embeddings[Text Embeddings documentation].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The list of Voyage AI models can be found in the link:https://docs.voyageai.com/docs/embeddings[Voyage AI Text Embeddings documentation].
```

|[[embeddings-voyageai-baseurl]]xref:embeddings-voyageai-baseurl[`embeddings.voyageai.baseUrl`]
|https://api.voyageai.com/v1/
|Base Voyage AI API server.
|[[embeddings-voyageai-operation-timeout-ms]]xref:embeddings-voyageai-operation-timeout-ms[`embeddings.voyageai.operation.timeout.ms`]

> |15,000 (15 seconds)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|15000 (15 seconds)
```

The size of the vector depends on the selected model.
To provide the internal representation of an embedding, {prodname} uses the link:https://github.com/debezium/debezium/blob/main/debezium-core/src/main/java/io/debezium/data/vector/FloatVector.java[FloatVector] data type.
The schema type of the embedding field in the record is `io.debezium.data.FloatVector`.

Both source field and embedding field specifications support nested structures, such as, `after.product_description_embedding`.

== Configuration

To configure a connector to use the embeddings transformation, add the following lines to your connector configuration:

[source]
----
transforms=embeddings,
transforms.embeddings.type=io.debezium.ai.embeddings.FieldToEmbedding
----

You must specify at least one field to use as the input for the embedding.
Destination field where the embedding will be placed is not mandatory.
If it's not specified, message value will contain only the embedding itself.
However, it's recommended to specify the embedding destination field, for example:

[source]
----
transforms.embeddings.field.source=after.product
transforms.embeddings.field.embedding=after.product_embedding
----

> Finally, you must place the model provider jar file in the connector class path, and configure the provider.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, you must place the model provider JAR file in the connector class path, and configure the provider.
```

For example, for the Ollama provider, add `debezium-ai-embeddings-ollama-$VERSION.jar` to your connector class path, and add the Ollama URL and model name to the connector configuration, as shown in the following example:

[source]
----
transforms.ai.embeddings.ollama.url=http://localhost:11434
transforms.ai.embeddings.ollama.model.name=all-minilm
----

The following example shows what the full configuration for an Ollama provider might look like:

[source]
----
transforms=ai,
transforms.ai.type=io.debezium.ai.embeddings.FieldToEmbedding

> transforms.ai.embeddings.field.source=after.product

Reviewer 2: Have you removed the `.embeddings.` right?
